Getting Started
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The basic way to use cpymad is to create a :class:`~cpymad.madx.Madx`
instance that can be used to control and access the state of a MAD-X process:

.. code-block:: python

    from cpymad.madx import Madx
    madx = Madx()

This spawns a MAD-X process in the background and opens a communication
channel that will be used to submit commands and fetch data using a simple RPC
framework.

Note that running MAD-X in a separate process and using it via the remote
channel has several benefits over loading it directly into the python process
space. For one this allows to use any number of MAD-X instances in parallel.
More than that the MAD-X interpreter can be started and stopped independently
of the lifetime of the parent process, and perhaps most importantly, the main
process is shielded from potential crashes occuring within the MAD-X
interpreter.


Basic MAD-X commands
====================

Now that you started MAD-X, most MAD-X commands can be executed using the
corresponding method on the :class:`~cpymad.madx.Madx` instance (except in the
case where the name of the command conflicts with another property, in this
case, see the `command()`_ property). For example:

.. code-block:: python

    madx.option(echo=True)

    madx.call(file='/path/to/some/input_file.madx')

    madx.twiss(
        sequence='LEBT',
        betx=0.1, bety=0.1,
        alfx=0.1, alfy=0.1)

In general, parameters must be passed by their name, exactly as for the MAD-X
command. Flags should be passed as python bools, deferred expressions (``:=``)
as strings, and direct expressions (``=``) as floats using
:meth:`~cpymad.madx.Madx.eval`.

Most of the command methods are auto-generated by introspecting the
corresponding MAD-X command object. Only a few of the methods provide
additional functionality over the raw MAD-X commands:

:meth:`~cpymad.madx.Madx.call` allows to temporarily change the directory to
the one of the executed file by setting the optional ``chdir`` parameter to
``True``:

.. code-block:: python

    # change directory to `/path/to/your/` during CALL:
    madx.call('/path/to/your/file.madx', chdir=True)

:meth:`~cpymad.madx.Madx.twiss` returns the resulting twiss table_, which can
be used conveniently for your own analysis, e.g.:

.. code-block:: python

    twiss = madx.twiss(sequence='LEBT', betx=1, bety=1)

    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    plt.plot(twiss.s, twiss.betx)
    plt.show()

:meth:`~cpymad.madx.Madx.survey` returns the resulting survey table, similar
to :meth:`~cpymad.madx.Madx.twiss`.


Controlling MAD-X
=================

The :class:`~cpymad.madx.Madx` class works by feeding commands in the form of
textual input to the MAD-X process. This means that you can execute all MAD-X
commands, even if they are not explicitly defined on the python class level.

input()
-------

The method responsible for feeding textual input to MAD-X is
:meth:`~cpymad.madx.Madx.input` method. It is called with a single string
argument that will be forwarded as input to the MAD-X interpreter. For
example:

.. code-block:: python

    madx.input('CALL, FILE="fodo.madx";')

Do not input anything but simple single line commands, no comments.

command()
---------

While it can be necessary to use :meth:`~cpymad.madx.Madx.input` for some
constructs like macros or loops, most of the time your most favorable option
is to use the :attr:`~cpymad.madx.Madx.command` attribute. It provides syntactic
sugar for composing regular MAD-X commands from python variables and feeding
the generated command string to :meth:`~cpymad.madx.Madx.input`.

.. code-block:: python

    madx.command.beam(sequence='fodo', particle='PROTON')

If you need to override how :attr:`~cpymad.madx.Madx.command` generates the
command string (argument order/formatting), you can pass strings as positional
arguments. For example:

.. code-block:: python

    madx.command.beam('sequence=fodo', particle='PROTON')

Note that positional and keyword parameters can be mixed.

A single trailing underscore will be stripped from the attribute name. This is
useful for MAD-X commands that are python keywords:

.. code-block:: python

    madx.command.global_(sequence='cassps', Q1=26.58)

In order to clone a command or element (colon syntax in MAD-X), use the
:meth:`~cpymad.madx.Command.clone` method:

.. code-block:: python

    madx.command.quadrupole.clone('QP', AT=2, L=1)

which translates to the MAD-X command::

    QP: QUADRUPOLE, AT=2, L=1;

chdir()
-------

:meth:`~cpymad.madx.Madx.chdir` changes the directory of the MAD-X process
(not the current python process).

This method is special in that it is currently the only modification of the
MAD-X interpreter state that does not go through the
:meth:`~cpymad.madx.Madx.input` method (because there is no MAD-X command to
change the directory).

Others
------

At this point, you should be able to execute arbitrary MAD-X commands via
cpymad.

All other methods for controlling MAD-X are just syntactic sugar for
:meth:`~cpymad.madx.Madx.input`. Among others, this has the following main
benefits:

- every modification of the MAD-X state is transparent from the
  ``command_log`` file
- the session should be reproducible using the official ``madx`` command line
  client by the commands in the ``command_log`` file.
- reduces the need for special implementations on the cython binding by always
  going through the same interface.

More methods for changing state:

- :meth:`~cpymad.madx.Madx.verbose`: switch on or off verbose mode.


Accessing MAD-X
===============

In contrast to how cpymad is *controlling* the MAD-X state, when *accessing*
state it does not use MAD-X commands, but rather directly retrieves the data
from the C variables in the MAD-X process memory!

This means that data retrieval is relatively fast because it does **not**:

- parse command in the MAD-X interpreter
- use a file on disk or the network
- parse resulting data on python side
- to potentially modify the MAD-X interpreter state by executing a command

Apart from this major advantage, another important implication is that the
``command_log`` file will not be cluttered by data-retrieval commands but only
show *actions*.


version
-------

Access the MAD-X version:

.. code-block:: python

    print(madx.version)
    # individual parts
    print(madx.version.date)
    print(madx.version.release)
    # or as tuple:
    print(madx.version.info >= (5, 3, 6))


elements
--------

Access to global elements:

.. code-block:: python

    # list of element names:
    print(list(madx.elements))

    # check whether an element is defined:
    print('qp1' in madx.elements)

    # get element properties:
    elem = madx.elements.qp1
    print(elem.k1)
    print(elem.l)

Note that elements support dict-like item access to retrieve properties (i.e.
``elem['k1']``) besides attribute access. The same is true in other places.


table
-----

View of MAD-X tables:

.. code-block:: python

    # list of existing table names
    print(list(madx.table)):

    # get table as dict-like object:
    twiss = madx.table.twiss

    # get columns as numpy arrays:
    alfx = twiss.alfx
    betx = twiss.alfy

    # get all twiss variables for 10th element:
    row = twiss[10]


globals
-------

Dictionary-like view of the MAD-X global variables:

.. code-block:: python

    # list of variable names
    print(list(madx.globals))

    # value of a builtin variable
    print(madx.globals.PI)

Evaluate an expression in the MAD-X interpreter:

.. code-block:: python

    print(madx.eval('sb->angle / pi * 180'))


sequence
--------

Dictionary like view of all defined sequences:

.. code-block:: python

    # list of sequence names
    print(list(madx.sequence))

    # get a proxy object for the sequence
    fodo = madx.sequence.fodo

    beam = fodo.beam
    print(beam.ex, beam.ey)

    # ordered dict-like object of explicitly defined elements:
    elements = fodo.elements

    # OR: including implicit drifts:
    expanded = fodo.expanded_elements


Logging commands
================

For the purpose of debugging, reproducibility and transparency in general, it
is important to be able to get a listing of the user input sent to
MAD-X. This can be controlled using the ``command_log`` parameter. It accepts
file names, arbitrary callables and file-like objects as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    madx = Madx(command_log="log.madx")
    madx = Madx(command_log=print)
    madx = Madx(command_log=CommandLog(sys.stderr))


Redirecting output
==================

The output of the MAD-X interpreter can be controlled using the ``redirect``
parameter of the :class:`~cpymad.madx.Madx` constructor. It allows to disable
the output completely:

.. code-block:: python

    madx = Madx(stdout=False)

redirect it to a file:

.. code-block:: python

    with open('madx_output.log', 'w') as f:
        madx = Madx(stdout=f)

or send the MAD-X output directly to an in-memory pipe without going through
the filesystem:

.. code-block:: python

    madx = Madx(stdout=subprocess.PIPE)
    pipe = m._process.stdout
